# Intermediate - Abstract algebra

The situation here is problematic, because there are many good books which are just a little
hard to swallow for an average 257 student, but precious few good ones below that.  But you
learn by doing, so here we go:

### Difficulty: moderate

#### Dummit/Foote, *Abstract algebra*

[MR 92k:00007](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=92k%3A00007)

**[Pete Clark]** I bought this for 257--I was at the age where I uncritically bought all
assigned texts (actually, I may still be at that age; I don't recall passing on buying any
course texts recently), but as Chris knows the joke was on me, since we used the instructor's
lecture notes and not Dummit/Foote at all.  So I didn't really read it that much at the time.
I have read it since, since it is one of two general abstract algebra books in my collection.
I think it's an excellent undergraduate reference in that it has something to say, and often a
lot to say, about precisely everything that an undergraduate would ever run into in an algebra
class--and I'm not even exaggerating.  I would say this is a good book to have on your shelf if
you're an undergraduate because you can look up anything; I used it this fall as a solid
supplementary reference for character theory to Alperin and Bell's *Groups and
representations*, and it had an amazing amount of material, all clearly explained.  (Warning:
there is an incorrect entry in one of the character tables; it's either A\_5 or S\_5, I can't
remember which.)  Look elsewhere, particularly below, for a good exposition of modules over a
principal ideal domain; D/F's exposition is convoluted and overly lengthy.  In fact, overall I
would use this book as a reference instead of a primary text, because the idea of reading it
through from start to finish scares me.  It also has many, many good problems which develop
even more topics (e.g., commutative algebra and algebraic geometry).

#### Herstein, *Topics in algebra*

[MR 50 #9456](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=50+%239456)

This is a classic text by one of the masters.  Herstein has beautiful and elementary treatments
of groups and linear algebra (in the context of module theory).  But there is no field theory,
and he writes mappings on the right, which annoys many people.  Sometimes he suffers from the
same flaw of excessive elementarity as Spivak's calculus book, but overall the treatment is
quite pretty.  Many good exercises.  (Not to be confused with *Abstract algebra*
[MR 96j:00001](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=96j%3A00001), which is a much-cut
version for non-honors classes.)

**[Pete Clark]** But this is the book I would use if I were a well-prepared undergraduate
wanting to learn abstract algebra for the first time.  Wonderful exposition--clean, chatty but
not longwinded, informal--and a very efficient coverage of just the most important topics of
undergraduate algebra. Think of it as a slimmed down D/F.  "No field theory" is certainly an
exaggeration; the exposition there is quite brief, and the restriction to fields of
characteristic zero obscures the fact that much of the theory presented, including the Galois
theory, is the theory of *separable* field extensions, but even so, this is still the book I
open first to remind myself about the Galois theory I'm supposed to know.  The last main
chapter of the book is quite lengthy and treats linear algebra and canonical forms in detail,
which is one of the book's strongest features.  Also, there are many supplementary
topics--maybe Herstein really doesn't like field theory, since he inserts a section on the
transcendence of e early on in his field theory chapter as something of a breather--but there's
lots of good stuff to warm the heart of someone who likes to see his algebra applied to actual
stuff, especially number-theoretic stuff; the famed Two and Four Squares Theorems are both
proved in here!

#### Artin, *Algebra*

[MR 92g:00001](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=92g%3A00001)

Artin's book is a nontraditional approach to undergraduate algebra, emphasizing concrete
computational examples heavily throughout.  Accordingly, linear algebra and matrix groups
occupy the first part of the book, and the traditional group-ring-field troika comes later.
This approach has the advantage of providing many nontrivial examples of the general theories,
but you may not want to wait that long to get there.  Supposed to be well written, though I
haven't read it thoroughly.

### Difficulty: higher

#### Jacobson, *Basic algebra* I

[MR 86d:00001](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=86d%3A00001)

Jacobson was my first real algebra book, and I retain an affection for it.  The book is very
densely written, and his prose has its own beauty but is difficult to get much from at first.
The selection of topics is interesting: chapters 1-4 cover groups, rings, modules, fields
(modules in the linear-algebra sense, that is, over principal ideal domains), while chapters
5-8 cover extension topics not usually found in general texts.  He deliberately avoids
modernist abstraction, preferring an explicit construction to a universal property and a
commutative diagram (although the universal property is frequently given), and this complicates
his notation and prose at times, especially in the module chapter.  The field-theory chapter is
fantastic.  Some of the exercises are deliberately too hard.

#### Hungerford, *Algebra*

[MR 82a:00006](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=82a%3A00006)

Many people like this book, but I don't.  Hungerford covers the standard topics from group,
ring, module, and field theory, with a little additional commutative ring theory and the
Wedderburn theory of algebras.  The field-theory chapter is horrible, and the rest of the book
is okay but doesn't excite me.  (And the typesetting is bad.)

#### Lang, *Algebra*

[MR 86j:00003](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=86j%3A00003)

Well, do you like Serge Lang books, or not?  Like every other Serge Lang book, this one is
uncompromisingly modern, wonderfully comprehensive, and unpleasantly dry and tedious to read.
Unlike most other Serge Lang books, this one has exercises, at least.

#### Mac Lane/Birkhoff, *Algebra*

[MR 89i:00009](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=89i%3A00009)

I keep recommending this book to people because it's the only hard one whose contents
correspond well to the 257-8-9 syllabus, and also because I like Mac Lane's treatment of linear
and multilinear algebra.  Mac Lane and Lang are the only books in this group which treat
multilinear (tensor) algebra at all, and believe me, you'll need it eventually.  Worth a look
to see whether you find Mac Lane's style congenial.  Not to be confused with Birkhoff/Mac Lane,
*A survey of modern algebra* [MR 31 #2250](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=31+%232250)
(a much shorter and easier book).

**[Ben Recht]** I used Mac Lane/Birkhoff's book pretty heavily in Math 257 and 258.  Unlike
most algebra books I've seen, they don't put all the group theory at the beginning and all of
the field theory at the end, but prefer to develop each topic a little bit at a time and then
develop it with more depth later.  As a result, this book is hard to use as a reference.  You
can't get past rings without tackling categories and universal constructions which are used
heavily throughout the remainder of the text.  However, their treatment of categorical algebra
is one of the more readable introductions to the theory I've come across.

#### Judson, *Abstract Algebra Theory and Applications*

I'm recommending this book because it is open-source and freely available online. A physical 
copy is also available very cheaply. The text is targeted at upper level undergraduates. The 
first half of the book covers group theory up through the Sylow Theorems and the second half 
covers rings, integral domains, Boolean algebras, vector spaces, fields, and Galois theory.

The book also covers some applications, including cryptography and coding theory. The author's
website includes supplementary material and Sage code.